Title: How I Built This Website with Pelican
Date: 2025-06-16
Tags: pelican, python, blog, portfolio, website
Category: Meta
Slug: how-i-built-this
Authors: Oscar Kelly
Summary: A technical overview of how I used Python and Pelican to build my MMA analytics site.

---
Before we get into any analysis, I needed somewhere to house all of the amazing insights that will change the face of the MMA world - and by extension, the actual world - forever. But if all of the analysis turns out to be rubbish, at least I'll be able to say that all my failings are housed on a website I built from scratch!

This blog is powered by [Pelican](https://getpelican.com), a static site generator written in Python. The website is hosted on GitHub Pages. Here’s how I built it from scratch, and how you can too.

---

### Step 1: Set Up Python & Pelican

I used **Anaconda Prompt** to create the site:

```bash
pip install pelican markdown
pelican-quickstart
```

This will generate a series of questions for you to answer about the site name, URL, author, and deployment options. I chose GitHub Pages to host the website, but there are options for S3, Dropbox, and more. This will guide the package in how to build your website and the folder structure that you will need.

### Step 2: Create a Post

In the folders generated by pelican, there will be a `content/posts/` folder - this is where your articles should be stored so that they are properly generated on the website at the end. Each article should be a markdown file with a header, containing key metadata that will be shown in the article:

```markdown
Title: My first post
Date: 2025-06-16
Tags: mma, analytics
```

You can edit these markdown files in whatever text editor you prefer to use - I used VS Code with its Markdown preview functionality, so I can see what the post would look like in real time!

### Step 3: Choosing a Theme

This is where you can add some flair to your currently drab website - you can create a file called `custom.css` that houses your styling instructions for the website. To apply the CSS file to your post, add the stylesheet reference in the `pelicanconf.py` file, and modify the `base.html` file inside the `theme` directory. This can feel a bit convoluted and isn't essential, but it definitely adds something to your website that makes it feel unique!

### Step 4: Preview the Website Locally

You should now be in a position to have a look at your website, to see what your users will see when they get there. You can run the following code to host a preview of your website locally on your machine:

```bash
pelican content
cd output
python -m http.server 8000
```

This will host the website on a port on your machine, which you can access by typing `http://localhost:8000` into your browser.

### Step 5: Push the Website to GitHub

If you want to share your website with the wider world, you'll need to host it online. One free way to do this is by creating a GitHub repository, naming it the same as your desired website URL, and running the following from the project root in the Anaconda prompt:

```bash
git init
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit"
git remote add origin git@github.com:[REPO_PATH]
git push -u origin main
```

After a minute or so, you should be able to access your website via the URL you specified.

### Final Thoughts

While the blog is about exploring the sport of MMA through a data lens, I thought it was important to briefly cover the details of how this website came to be - building this platform has given me a way to shape how I present ideas, try new functionality, and creatively craft a story around the technical side of any analysis. Hopefully, it also makes reading it all a bit more enjoyable too!